This chapter documents the backend for the 65816
processor family.

@section Additional options

This backend provides the following additional options:

@table @option

    @item -mtiny
		Use tiny memory model. All data pointers are near-pointers
		unless otherwise specified.

    @item -mhuge
                Use huge memory model. All data pointers are huge-pointers
                unless otherwise specified.

    @item -ptr24
		All far- and huge-pointers are 24 bits wide unless otherwise
		specified.

    @item -near-threshold=<size>
                Set the threshold for automatic near placement to <size> bytes.

    @item -no-near-const
                Do not automatically place constant data into near section.
                Explicit use of __near specifier is still possible.

    @item -std-syntax
              Generate code for the std syntax module of vasm rather than
              the default oldstyle syntax module.

    @item -const-in-data
              Put constant data in data section rather than rodata.

    @item -cbmascii
              Convert string-constants and character-constants to CBM ASCII.

    @item -atascii
              Convert string-constants and character-constants to Atari ASCII.

    @item -iigs
              Put near data in zpage section. Used for small memory model
              on Apple IIgs.

    @item -msfp4
              Use MSBasic 32bit format for floating point rather than wozfp format.

    @item -ieee
              Use 32/64bit IEEE format for floating point rather than wozfp format.

    @item -snes-muldiv
              Perform integer multiplication (division not yet implemented)
              with library functions that make use of the 5A22 hardware
              multiplier. Those routines are significantly faster but they
              are not re-entrant., i.e. you must make sure that e.g. an
              interrupt handler does not use multiplication or division if
              the main code does so as well.

    @item -no-delayed-popping
              By default arguments of function calls are not always popped
              from the stack immediately after the call, so that the
              arguments of several calls may be popped at once.
              With this option @command{vbcc} can be forced to pop them after every
              function call.
              This may simplify debugging and reduce the
              stack size needed by the compiled program.

    @item -glob-acc
              By default, the register allocator will only assign temporary
              variables to the accumulator register or @code{a/x} register pair.
              Usually this reduces necessary storing/loading of the accumulator
              as it is needed during most operations. This option allows the
              register allocator to assign variables with bigger live ranges to
              the accumulator. This option is likely to create worse code in
              most cases. Use only for experimentation.

    @item -sc
		Use jsr/rts for function calls. Code size is more or less
		limited to 64K. Code using this option will be incomaptible
		with libraries that have been compiled without it.

		This option is not yet fully implemented.

@end table

@section ABI

    The current version generates assembler output for use with 
    @command{vasm6502_oldstyle} or  @command{vasm6502_std}. 
    The option @command{-opt-branch} is needed.

    The register names provided by this backend are:

@example
        a, x, y, r0..r31, btmp0..btmp3
@end example

        @code{a} is the accumulator. It can be used for type @code{char},
	@code{short} and @code{int}.

        @code{x} can be used for @code{char}, @code{short}, @code{int} and
	near-pointers.

        @code{y} is reserved for the code generator.

        @code{r0} ... @code{r31} are 16bit variables that can be used for type
        @code{char}, @code{short}, @code{int} and near-pointers. They have to be mapped
        to direct-page during linking. The compiler expects registers that can
        be used as register pairs (see below) to be mapped to contiguous
        memory locations. Some library routines may have additional requirements.

        @code{btmp0}..@code{btmp3} are 32bit variables that have to be mapped
	to direct-page.

        The following register pairs can also be used for
        24/32bit values.

@example
        a/x, r0/r1, r2/r3 ... r30/r31
@end example

        The following register pairs can be used for
        64bit values (IEEE doubles or long long).

@example
        btmp0/btmp1, btmp2/btmp3
@end example


       Registers @code{a, x, r0..r15, r28..r31, btmp0..btmp3} are volatile
       (i.e. they can be destroyed in function calls). @code{r16..r27} are
       preserved across function calls.

       The first 8/16/32bit argument is passed in the accumulator (a and x
       in the case of 32bit).
       All other types are passed on the stack.

       For functions with a variable-argument-list, arguments that are part
       of the variable-argument-list are always passed on the stack. It is
       therefore required that a prototype is in scope when calling such functions
       (as required by C).

       Scalar types are returned as follows:
@example
    type        registers

    char        a
    short       a
    int         a
    long        a/x
    long long   n/a
    near-ptrs   a
    far-ptrs    a/x
    float       a/x
    double      a/x or btmp0/btmp1 (IEEE)
    long double a/x or btmp0/btmp1 (IEEE)
@end example

       All other types are returned by passing the function the address
       of the result as a hidden argument - such a function must not be called
       without a proper declaration in scope.

The basic data types are represented like this:

@example
    type        size in bits        alignment in bytes

    char                8                       1
    short              16                       1
    int                16                       1
    long               32                       1
    long long          64                       1       (currently not supported)
    near pointers      16                       1
    far pointers       32                       1
    far3 pointers      24                       1
    huge pointers      32                       1
    huge3 pointers     24                       1
    float              32                       1       see below
    double             32/64                    1       see below
    long double        32/64                    1       see below
@end example


@section Math


    For certain operations @code{vbcc} will emit calls to routines that have
    to be provided by a library.
    For integer code, the following operations are handled by library routines
    (some special cases involving constants may be handled by inline code).

@example
     __mulint16                 16x16=>16 multiplication
     __mulint32                 32x32=>32 multiplication
     __divint16                 16x16=>16 signed division
     __divint32                 32x32=>32 signed division
     __divuint16                16x16=>16 unsigned division
     __divuint32                32x32=>32 unsigned division
     __modint16                 16x16=>16 signed modulo
     __modint32                 32x32=>32 signed modulo
     __moduint16                16x16=>16 unsigned modulo
     __moduint32                32x32=>32 unsigned modulo
@end example

@subsection Floating Point / wozfp

    By default, all floating point types are implemented as 32bit values
    using the format used by the floating point routines published by Roy Rankin
    and Steve Wozniak. While this does work for many use cases, it
    is not fully C compliant by any means. Calculation of constants in the
    compiler is not done in that format. Therefore, the results of
    calculations done at compile-time may be different from those at run-time.
    The corresponding math library must be linked using @code{-lm/-lms}.

    These routines are very compact, but they are very slow. They
    should probably only be used when saving memory is the top priority.

@subsection Floating Point / MSBASIC

    The second, usually preferable, alternative is based on the math
    routines from 6502 Microsoft Basic (which has been released under
    MIT license - see below). These routines have been adapted
    to work with vbcc65816. They deliver much better performance than the
    wozfp code and are usually somewhat more precise. Currently only
    the 32bit version of those routines is supported (the 40bit version
    is not).
    You have to specify @code{-msfp4} and link the corresponding math library
    using @code{-lms4/-lms4h/-lms4s}.


     License from the release of MSBasic:
@example
MIT License 

    Copyright (c) Microsoft Corporation.

    Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
    of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
    in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
    to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
    copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
    furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

    The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
    copies or substantial portions of the Software.

    THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
    FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
    AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
    LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
    OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
    SOFTWARE
@end example

@subsection Floating Point / IEEE

    Not yet supported.



@section Target-Specific Variable Attributes

    This backend offers the following variable attributes:

@table @code
    @item __interrupt
          Used for writing interrupt handlers. All modified register will be
          restored. Note that that may include all volatile zpage registers
          in the case of function calls within the interrupt handler.

    @item __zpage
              Place variable in section @code{zpage} and instruct @code{vbcc}
              to use it with direct-page addressing.

@end table

@section Target-Specific Type Attributes

    This backend offers the following type attributes:

@table @code
	@item __near
		The object is addressed via the bank-register.
		Pointers to near-objects will be 16 bits wide.

        @item __far
                Such objects are addressed via full 24bit addressing. Arithmetic
		will be done with 16bit only, i.e. objects must not cross
		a bank-boundary. A pointer to a far-object will be 32 bits wide.

        @item __huge
                The object is addressed via full 24bit addressing. Arithmetic
                will be done with 32bits. A pointer to a far-object will be
		32 bits wide.

        @item __far3
		Same as __far, however pointers will be 24 bits wide. 24bit
                pointers occupy 3 bytes in memory instead of 4 bytes (there
		is no difference for pointers kept in registers). However,
		the code generated for accessing 24bit pointers is usually
		less efficient, because the CPU mode may have to be switched
		to access the upper 8bits. vbcc will try to avoid those
		mode-switches, but this is only possible in certain cases.

        @item __huge3
                Same as __huge, however pointers will be 24 bits wide. See above
		for details.

        @item __pascal
                Only for functions. Use calling conventions similar to pascal.
                All arguments are passed on the stack, and it is assumed that
                the callee removes the arguments from the stack and pushes
                the return value on the stack. The attribute is only effective
                when calling a function. It cannot be used to change the ABI
                of a function written in C.

                This attribute can help calling GSOS/ToolBox functions on Apple IIgs.
                However, it is only a partial implementation of that ABI.
                Arguments are still pushed in C order (last argument first)
                and vbcc does not make room on the stack for the return value.
                Therefore, some additional glue code will usually be needed,
                e.g.

@example
extern pascal Handle __NewHandle () inline(0x0902,dispatcher);
#define NewHandle(a,b,c,d) __NewHandle((d),(c),(b),(a),0l)
@end example

@end table



@section Target-Specific #pragmas

    This backend offers the following #pragmas

@table @code
    @item #pragma section <sec>
              The following functions and variables are placed in section <sec>.

    @item #pragma section default
              The following functions and variables are placed in default sections.

@end table


@section Predefined Macros

        This backend defines the following macros:

@table @code
        @item __65816__

        @item __MTINY          (tiny model)
        @item __MLARGE         (large model)
        @item __MHUGE          (huge model)
        @item __SIZE_T_INT     (tiny and large model)
        @item __SIZE_T_LONG    (huge model)
	@item __WOZFP__        (wozfp floating point)
	@item __MSFP4__	       (32bit MSBasic floating point)

@end table


@section Memory models

This backend supports different memory models, based on the 65816 architecture.

@subsection Pointer Types

Several types of pointers are supported. See the type qualifier list for
details. When pointer types are not
explicitly specified using type qualifiers, the default
pointer types depend on command line options like
@code{-mtiny},
@code{-mhuge}, or @code{-ptr24}. Function- and data-pointers can have
different default types.

It is also possible to use non-default memory types by explicitly
specifying type qualifiers (e.g. using far-data in the small data model).
But keep in mind that such objects might not be correctly addressable by
the default pointer type. When using pointers to such objects you may
have to explicitly specify the pointer type.

@subsection Small Code
This model is activated by the @code{-sc} option. It is not yet implemented.
Function pointers will be 16 bits wide and return addresses will occupy
2 bytes on the stack.

@subsection Large Code
This model is active by default. Code can be located anywhere in the 16MB
address range. Function pointers will be 24 or 32 bits wide and return
addresses will occupy 3 bytes on the stack.

Note however that due to limitations of the 65816 CPU, functions must not
cross a 64KB bank boundary.

@subsection Small Data
This model is used with @code{-mtiny}. Data will be addressed using 16bit offsets
to the data-bank register. Data pointers will be 16 bits wide. This model
usually creates smaller and faster code, but data is limited to 64KB and
the stack must be in the same bank as the near data. @code{size_t} is unsigned int.

@subsection Large Data
This model is used by default. Data will be addressed using
full 24bit addresses. Data pointers will either be 24 bits wide (if @code{-ptr24}
is specified) or 32 bits wide. However, when performing address arithmetic,
only the lower 16 bits will be used. As a result, objects can be located
anywhere in the 16MB address space, but they must not cross a bank boundary.
@code{size_t} is unsigned int.

@subsection Huge Data
This model is used with @code{-mlarge}. Data will be addressed using
full 24bit addresses. Data pointers will either be 24 bits wide (if @code{-ptr24}
is specified) or 32 bits wide. Address arithmetic is performed on the full
address. As a result, there is no restriction on placement and size of
objects (apart from the 16MB limit). @code{size_t} is unsigned long.
Take care to use prototypes or correct argument types when calling functions
using a @code{size_t} parameter.

@subsection Automatic near
By default, static objects less or equal to 8 bytes will be put into the near
section, allowing slightly more efficient code. The address of such an object
will be a normal pointer (i.e. far-pointer in far model and huge-pointer in
huge model). This is different from an object explicitly specified using the
__near attribute and therefore transparent to the program.

The threshold of 8 bytes can be changed using the @code{-near-threshold}
option. @code{-near-threshold=0} will disable the feature.

When using @option{-no-near-const} option, the feature is disabled for
read-only objects.

@section 8Bit Mode
The code generated by vbcc assumes that the accumulator and index registers
are running in 16bit mode. When 8bit data has to be accessed, vbcc will
temporarily switch to 8bit mode and back again (usually only the accumulator
is switched and the index registers are kept at 16bit).

Some optimizations are performed to reduce the necessary mode-switching. If
an operation can be performed in 16bit mode, there will usually be no mode
switch. Also, if several consecutive 8bit operations are performed, vbcc will
try to stay in 8bit mode as long as possible. However, these optimizations
are limited and usually only performed locally, i.e. the code will never stay
in 8bit mode across jumps etc.

Therefore it can be beneficial to adapt the source code accordingly. Usually
try to limit the ue of 8bit operations. Where necessary, try to group 8bit
operations.


@section Debugging

    The 6502 backend has some limited support for debugging.

    When using vlink, the @code{-vicelabels} options can be used to output symbol
    values in a format that can be read by the vice emulator/debugger. vlink
    also offers @code{-symfile} and @code{-symfmt} options to configure the
    format of the symbol file.

     With the @code{-g} option, line numbers and file names of source code will
    be added to the assembly output. Using some tools, it should be possible to
    create a mixed C/assembly file for inspection.
    Depending on the optimization level, the
    results may be more or less usable, see section Debugging Optimized Code.
    Note that the added comments will affect the assembly peephole
    optimizer, resulting in worse code than without @code{-g}.
    

@section Code compressor

  Not yet implemented.

@section Known problems

@itemize @minus
    @item @code{long long} not yet supported

    @item ...

@end itemize



