This chapter documents the backend for the Sunplus/GeneralPlus µn'SP processor family.

@section ABI

    The current version generates assembler output for use with Mike Kohn's naken_asm.
    This assembler does not emit intermediate object files, and there is no linker.

    The register names provided by this backend are:

@example
    SP, R1, R2, R3, R4, BP, SR, PC
@end example

    @code{R1} to @code{R4} are general purpose registers. SP is the stack pointer. PC is the code
    pointer and BP is the frame pointer. Normally only the four general purpose registers will be
    used by the generated code.

    All registers are 16 bit, the R3 and R4 registers are used as inputs and output (as a single 32
    bit value for the multiplication instruction.

    All basic data types (char, short, int, long and long long) are 16 bit wide.

    Functions return values are stored in R1.

    Functions save and restore all registers in the callee. Parameters are passed on the stack
    and removed from the stack by the caller.

@section Math

    The only math routines are @code{__mod} and @code{__div} for 32 bit by 16 bit division.

@section Segmented addresses

    Currently segmented addresses and "far calls" are not supported. All addresses are 16 bit.
    Relative jumps will allow to call code in the neighboring blocks. The data segment address
    is never changed.

@section Known problems

@itemize @minus
    @item Types larger than 16 bit are not supported
    @item There is no assembler with a linker, so only compilation can be done
    @item Larger memory models with data and code segment registers usage not available yet
    @item Pre and post increment addressing modes are not used
    @item Some operations and addressing modes are not generated properly
@end itemize
